===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

Idioms database 
a drop in the ocean a very small amount that will not have 
much effect: The cost of a hotel for one night is a drop 
in the ocean for a big company like that. 
a home from home a place where you feel as relaxed as 
you do in your own home: Everyone knows me at this 
hotel so it's a real home from home. 
a leopard can't change its spots used for saying that 
someone will never change their behaviour or character: 
Jimmy says he's changed, but a leopard can't change 
its spots, you know. 
a sight for sore eyes someone or something that you are 
very pleased to see: You're a sight for sore eyes! Thank 
goodness you're here! 
a stitch in time (saves nine) used for saying that it is 
better to solve a problem now, rather than leave it until 
later when it may be more difficult to deal with: If there's 
a problem with your car, it's better to get it looked at 
now. You know what they say: 'a stitch in time ... ' . 
a stone's throw (away/from) very close (to): Where we 
live is only a stone's throw from the park. 
Achilles' heel a weak feature of someone or something 
that could cause failure or be attacked: She's an 
extremely talented politician, but her Achilles' heel may 
be her inability to prioritise. 
add fuel to the fire make a bad situation worse: Your 
refusing to discuss this with Colin is just adding fuel to 
the fire, in my opinion. 
all in good time used for telling someone to wait for 
something and not try to make you hurry: You'll get the 
report when it's finished. All in good time! 
all mod cons all modern conveniences, the machines and 
pieces of equipment in your house that make life easy 
and comfortable: I'd quite like to move to a place that 
has all mod cons. 
an act of God an event such as a flood, lightning or an 
earthquake that is produced by natural forces, and that 
people have no control over: The insurance doesn't 
cover acts of God. 
as the crow flies in a straight line (used for measuring 
distance): It's about 200 miles as the crow flies. 
at a loose end with nothing in particular to do: If you're at 
a loose end this weekend, why don't we get together? 
at the drop of a hat immediately or in a way that shows 
that you have no doubts about doing something: Let me 
know if you need help and I'll be there at the drop of 
a hat! 
be born with a silver spoon in your mouth have 
advantages because you come from a rich family: I've 
always had to work hard because I wasn't born with a 
silver spoon in my mouth. 
be on the same wavelength understand the way another 
person thinks because you often have the same ideas 
and opinions they do: It was a difficult meeting because 
David and I didn't seem to be on the same wavelength. 
before your time used for saying that something 
happened or existed before you were born or before 
you lived or worked somewhere: When I was a girl, we 
didn't have mobile phones. That was before your time, 
of course. 
below/under par below the usual or expected standard: 
Your essays have been a bit below par recently. Is 
anything wrong? 
big mouth used as a criticism of someone when they say 
things they should not: Don't tell Jamie anything you 
want to remain secret - he's got a big mouth' 
blot on the landscape something that makes a place look 
less attractive, for example an ugly building: Many 
people in the town think that the old factory is a blot on 
the landscape. 
break even if a person or business breaks even, they 
neither make a profit nor lose money: We didn't make a 
profit last year, but we did break even. 
break the mould change a situation by doing something 
that is very different from what most people usually do 
or have done in the past: I thought her last movie really 
broke the mould. 
bury your head in the sand ignore a problem or an 
unpleasant situation and hope that it will disappear: We 
shouldn't just bury our heads in the sand and hope that 
this problem goes away. 
change your tune change your opinion or attitude: Tom 
often criticised Nadia until he met her, but now he's 
changed his tune. 
clean as a whistle completely honest or legal: I'm not 
worried about the tax inspection. This company's 
accounts are clean as a whistle. 
clean as a whistle extremely clean: My mum's coming to 
visit tomorrow so I want the house to be as clean as a 
whistle when she gets here. 
come clean (about sth) tell the truth about something 
that you have kept secret: You'd better come clean and 
tell Mum it was you who broke the flowerpot. 
come rain or shine used for saying that something always 
happens or someone always does something despite 
bad weather or difficult conditions: I'm determined to 
finish building the house by the end of the month, come 
rain or shine. 
commuter belt area surrounding a large city where many 
people who work in that city live: Towns in the 
commuter belt often seem to lack character. 
concrete jungle unpleasant part of a city where there are 
a lot of ugly buildings close together: Where we used to 
live was a bit of a concrete jungle. 
couch potato someone who spends a lot of time sitting at 
home watching television: I've become a bit of a couch 
potato since I stopped playing football. 
cry over spilt milk waste time feeling upset about 
something bad that has happened and cannot be 
changed: I know your CD player's broken, but there's no 
point crying over spilt milk, is there? 
do sth on a whim do because of a sudden feeling that you 
must have or do something: Wendy decided on a whim 
to redecorate the whole house. 
down on your luck having a long period of difficulty finding 
work and earning money: The man was obviously down 
on his luck, so I gave him a little money. 
257

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

-
Idioms database 
258 
draw the line (at) say that you will definitely not allow or 
accept something: I don't mind you asking if you can 
borrow some money, but I draw the line at you taking it 
out of my purse without asking first. 
draw the short straw be chosen to do something 
unpleasant: Somebody has to stay home to look after 
the dog, and I'm afraid you've drawn the short straw. 
fall short not reach a particular level or to fail to achieve 
something you were trying to do: We tried to raise 
1,000 euros for charity, but we fell short by about 50 
euros. 
fifty-fifty equal, or into two equal parts: We split the cost of 
the meal fifty-fifty. 
fly off the handle suddenly become extremely angry 
without a good reason: Whatever she says, don't fly off 
the handle. Stay calm' 
follow your nose do what you feel is right in a particular 
situation, although you are not certain: The detective 
had learned to follow his nose in situations like this. 
follow your nose go straight forward, without turning: 
Once you go past the traffic lights, just follow 
your nose. 
for good permanently, without the possibility of change in 
the future: Have Don and Jenny split up for good, do 
you think, or is it only temporary7 
for the time being for now: I'm staying in rented 
accommodation for the time being, but hope to buy a 
place early next year. 
from time to time sometimes, but not often: We see Brian 
from time to time, but not regularly. 
gain/getjhave/take the upper hand gain/get/have/ 
take control or advantage over a person or situation: It 
looked like lvor was going to win the game, but I soon 
got the upper hand. 
get on like a house on fire become good friends very 
quickly and have a lot to talk to each other about: 
George and Isabelle seem to be getting on like a house 
on fire, don't they7 
get sth off your chest talk to someone about something 
that has been worrying you, so that you feel better 
about it: It feels such a relief to have got this off 
my chest. 
get the wrong end of the stick understand something 
completely wrongly: Don said he was going to France 
and I got the wrong end of the stick and thought he was 
moving there for ever. 
get/catch sb's drift understand the basic meaning: 
Doreen and I have been having some problems recently, 
if you catch my drift. 
get/have your way be allowed to have or do what 
you want: If I had my way, I would stay at home 
this summer. 
give sb a taste/dose of their own medicine treat 
someone in the same bad way they treat other people: 
He got me into trouble, so I'm going to give him a taste 
of his own medicine! 
give sb your word promise to do something: I give you my 
word I won't tell anyone. 
give sth a miss decide not to do something that you 
usually do: I think I'll give the office party a miss 
this year. 
go halves share the cost of something with someone so 
that you each pay 50%: Let's go halves on the meal, 
shall we7 
go to your head if success goes to your head, it makes 
you think that you are better or more important than you 
really are: I hope getting that scholarship doesn't go to 
Carol's head. 
grin and bear it accept a difficult situation without 
complaining or showing how you feel: An author just has 
to grin and bear it when a book gets a bad review. 
have a change of heart change your opinion about 
something or decide not to do something you were 
planning to do: William's had a change of heart and 
decided not to go to university after all. 
have green fingers be good at growing plants: My wife's 
always had green fingers, whereas I don't know anything 
about growing plants. 
have time on your hands have more time available than 
you need: Julie has a lot more time on her hands now 
that her children have al/ left home. 
have your wits about you be able to think quickly and 
make sensible decisions: You've got to have your wits 
about you when dealing with pushy salespeople. 
(hear sth) on/through the grapevine the way in which 
information spreads quickly from one person to another 
through conversation: I heard through the grapevine you 
might be getting married soon. 
home sweet home used for saying that you are happy to 
be back in your own home: It was a good trip, but 
there's nothing like home sweet home. 
in/for donkey's years an extremely long time: I haven't 
been swimming in donkey's years. 
in sb's bad/good books used for saying that someone is 
annoyed/pleased with you: I don't think I'm in Mrs 
Patterson's good books at the moment. 
in the dark (about} not knowing very much about 
something, because other people are keeping it secret 
from you: The Prime Minister kept even his closest 
colleagues in the dark about when he would call a 
general election. 
in the middle of nowhere a long way from any town or 
city: The car broke down and we realised we were in the 
middle of nowhere. 
in the nick of time just in time to prevent something bad 
happening: The swimmers were rescued in the nick 
of time. 
in the sticks in an area far from the town or city: I don't 
think I could live so far out in the sticks. 
it's as broad as it's long used for saying that you cannot 
choose between two things or actions because they are 
equal: It's as broad as it's long whether we get there on 
Saturday night or on Sunday morning. 
keep a straight face remain serious and not laugh: I 
couldn't keep a straight face when I saw Mike's 
new haircut. 
keep sb posted regularly give someone information about 
something they are interested in, for example how a 
situation is changing or developing: Do please keep me 
posted about any developments. 
keep sth under your hat keep something secret: Keep 
it under your hat, but we're thinking of buying a 
new house.

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

keep up with the Joneses try to be as rich, successful, 
etc as your neighbours: / don't need a new car, and I'm 
really not interested in keeping up with the Joneses. 
keep your hair on used for telling someone not to get 
angry or upset: Keep your hair on! There's no need to 
get annoyed' 
kick yourself be very annoyed because you have made 
a mistake, missed an opportunity, etc: / could have 
kicked myself when I realised I'd left my wallet in 
the restaurant. 
knee-high to a grasshopper very small, because you 
were very young: When I was knee-high to a 
grasshopper, I used to believe that a monster lived 
under my bed. 
know sth inside out be very familiar with: Maria's been in 
the business for years and she knows advertising 
inside out. 
know what's what know the important facts about a 
situation: Ask Tony about the proposed changes. He 
knows what's what. 
last word in the newest and best type of something: The 
ZD-2000 is the last word in mobile phones. 
lay/put your cards on the table tell people exactly what 
you are thinking or what you are intending to do: I'm 
going to lay my cards on the table and offer you an 
extra £1,000. But that's my final offer' 
let nature take its course allow something to develop 
without trying to influence it: I'm sure sales will improve 
if we just let nature take its course. 
let off steam shout or do something that allows you to get 
rid of anger: / was so annoyed I had to go for a long 
walk to let off steam. 
let sleeping dogs lie leave a person or situation alone if 
they might cause you trouble: / know you think your 
parents are being unfair, but it's probably best to let 
sleeping dogs lie and not make it worse by arguing. 
let your hair down relax and enjoy yourself because you 
are in a comfortable environment: It's good to let your 
hair down after a hard week at work. 
life and soul of the party someone who is very lively at 
social events: Harry's so much fun and everyone says 
he's the life and sou/ of the party. 
like two peas in a pod used for saying that two people 
look, behave or think exactly the same: Irene and her 
sister are like two peas in a pod. 
line your pocket(s) obtain money, especially by acting 
dishonestly: He'd been lining his pockets for years 
before he was finally caught. 
live and let live used for saying that you should accept 
other people's beliefs and way of life, even if they are 
very different from your own: / don't agree with what 
he's doing, but live and let live, I say. 
lock, stock and barrel including every part of a particular 
thing, situation, place, etc: They've sold all their 
possessions, lock, stock and barrel. 
lose your bearings become confused about where you 
are and where other things are: / lost my bearings for a 
moment, but then realised where I was. 
make a beeline for go towards someone or something in 
the quickest and most direct way: As soon as we 
arrived at the hotel, Molly made a beeline for the 
manager to complain. 
Idioms database 
make yourself at home feel relaxed and behave in the 
same way as you do in your own home: Charles will be 
down in a moment, so please make yourselves at home. 
never/don't look a gift horse in the mouth if you are 
given something good, you should not complain about it 
or try to find things that are wrong with it: The flat 
wasn't in very good condition, but we were staying there 
rent-free, and you should never look a gift horse in the 
mouth, should you7 
no rhyme or reason used for emphasising that there is no 
reason or explanation for something: There seems to be 
no rhyme or reason for the decision. 
not have a leg to stand on not have any way of proving 
that you are right about something: George tried to 
argue that the world was flat, but of course he didn't 
have a leg to stand on. 
not see the wood for the trees used for saying that 
someone cannot understand what is important in a 
situation because they are thinking too much about 
small details: Many people can't see the wood for the 
trees when talking about joining the eurozone; they just 
think about what's on the notes and coins and don't 
think about the economic benefits. 
off the beaten track away from populated areas or areas 
popular with tourists: We like to get off the beaten track 
when we go on holiday. 
on good terms (with) have a good relationship with 
someone: When / left the job, I was still on good terms 
with everyone in the office. 
on the spur of the moment if you do something on the 
spur of the moment, you do it suddenly and do not take 
time to plan it or think carefully about it: We booked 
the holiday on the spur of the moment. We hadn't been 
planning to take a break at all this summer. 
on the street with no place to live: Life is hard on 
the street. 
on the town spending the evening enjoying yourself in 
bars, clubs, theatres, etc: Did you go out on the town 
on your birthday7 
once in a blue moon very rarely: To be honest, I only go 
to museums once in a blue moon. I just don't have 
time usually. 
out of the blue happening in a way that is sudden and 
unexpected, and does not seem connected with 
anything that happened before: Then, suddenly, out of 
the blue, she said she wanted a divorce. 
out of this world extremely good or impressive: The food 
at that restaurant is out of this world' 
over the top more than what is considered normal or . 
suitable: Don't you think spending 500 euros on a pair 
of shoes was a bit over the top7 
pride of place in the place that is most central or 
. 
important: This stamp's extremely rare, and takes pnde 
of place in my stamp collection. 
pull (a few) strings use your influence in order to get 
something you want or to help someone, especially 
when this is unfair: / don't think it's fair to pull strings in 
order to get a job. 
put sth in perspective provide a sensible way of judging 
how good, bad, important, etc something is in 
comparison with other things: My illness has certainly 
put everything else in perspective. 
259

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

Idioms database 
260 
put two and two together guess what is happening or 
what something means based on what you have seen or 
heard: He didn't tell us he was retiring, but we could all 
put two and two together. 
put your feet up sit down and relax, especially with your 
feet raised off the ground: Put your feet up and I'll 
make dinner. 
quick/slow on the uptake taking a very short/long time 
to understand or realise something: I'm sure Chad 
understood what you were suggesting; he's very quick 
on the uptake. 
recharge your batteries rest after being very busy, so 
that you will be ready to start working again: Why don't 
you take a week off work to recharge your batteries7 
red tape documents, rules or processes that cause 
delays: Is there a lot of red tape involved in getting 
a passport? 
reinvent the wheel waste time and effort trying to do 
something that someone else has already done well: 
Just use the same document you used last time, 
because there's no point reinventing the wheel. 
ring a bell something that rings a bell sounds familiar to 
you, although you cannot remember the exact details: 
The name rings a bell but I'm not sure if I've ever 
met her. 
round the bend crazy: That noise is driving me round 
the bend1 
satellite town town or city that is close to and depends 
on a larger city: Brentwood is a satellite town just 
outside London. 
sb is only human used for saying someone has been 
weak in the ways most people are weak and should 
not be blamed for their behaviour: I'm sorry I made a 
mistake, but I'm only human. 
see eye to eye (with sb) agree with someone or have the 
same opinion as them: Imagen and I have never really 
seen eye to eye. 
set your heart on decide that you want something very 
much: I had set my heart on getting married on the 
beach, but the bad weather meant we couldn't. 
six of one (and) half a dozen of the other used for 
saying that two things are equally good or bad: We 
could get there on Saturday night or Sunday morning; 
it's six of one and half a dozen of the other, really. 
speak volumes provide a lot of information, especially in 
an indirect way: What he said to Mandy speaks volumes 
about the way he treats his staff. 
split hairs argue or worry about very small details or 
differences that are not important: Whether you call 
them 'terrorists' or 'freedom fighters' is just splitting 
hairs - the point is that they're killing people! 
steal the show receive a lot of attention because you give 
the best performance in a show or other event: There 
was one comedian who really stole the show. She 
was fantastic' 
stick to your guns refuse to change what you are saying 
or doing despite the opposition or criticism of other 
people: I admire Kelly for the way she always sticks to 
her guns. 
stop dead in your tracks suddenly stop, for example 
because you are surprised: When I heard the gunshot, I 
stopped dead in my tracks. 
take a short cut to follow a path that is quicker and 
shorter than the usual way: I walked to school and I 
used to take a short cut along the canal. 
take stock (of) spend some time thinking about the 
situation you are in before you decide what to do next: 
Let's take a couple of days to take stock of the situation 
and then we'll make a decision. 
take the law into your own hands punish someone in 
your own way without involving the police or the courts, 
often by doing something illegal yourself: I know you're 
angry, but that's no reason to take the law into your own 
hands. 
take the scenic route follow a longer path than the usual 
one because it is more attractive: We're not lost - we're 
just taking the scenic route. 
tell tales tell someone in authority about bad things that 
someone else has done, because you want them to be 
punished: Toby, stop telling tales about your classmates. 
the edge over an advantage that makes someone or 
something more successful than other people or 
things: Our product's got the edge over the competition 
because it's so lightweight. 
the luck of the draw used for saying people have limited 
control over what life brings them: I never wanted to 
become a butcher, but I guess that's the luck of 
the draw. 
the other day recently: There was an interesting item on 
the news the other day. 
the powers that be the people who control a situation: I 
don't know if the powers that be will agree to that. 
the tools of the trade the skills and equipment that you 
need in order to do your job: A good bedside manner is 
one of the tools of the trade for a doctor. 
throw the book at sb punish someone very severely: 
They'll really throw the book at him this time. 
tidy sum/amount large sum/amount: I've managed to put 
away a tidy sum this year. 
touch wood used when you have said that you have had 
good luck in order to prevent bad luck from happening 
to you: /'II find a new job before too long, touch wood. 
turn over a new leaf change your life by starting to be a 
better person or stopping a bad habit: Ralph seems to 
have turned over a new leaf this term. 
under sb's thumb completely controlled by someone else: 
I became self-employed because I was sick of being 
under someone's thumb. 
up in arms about angry and complaining about 
something: Everyone in the office is up in arms about 
having to work next weekend. 
variety is the spice of life used for saying that different 
experiences and situations make life enjoyable or 
interesting: I do a million different things at work, but I 
suppose variety is the spice of life. 
your flesh and blood your relative: My family is very 
important to me because, after all, they're my flesh 
and blood.
