===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

Phrasal verbs database 
add up to combine to produce a particular result or effect: These 
new measures do not add up to genuine reform. 
add up to if separate amounts add up to a total amount, together 
they form that total: His business expenses add up to around 
£4,000 a year. 
answer back reply rudely to someone who has more authority 
than you: I got into trouble for answering the teacher back. 
ask out invite someone to go with you to a cinema, restaurant, 
etc because you want to start a romantic or sexual 
relationship with them: Fred asked Vanessa to go out with him 
but she said no. 
back down stop asking for something or stop saying that you will 
do something, because a lot of people oppose you: I'm not 
going to back down just because a few people disagree 
with me. 
back up give support to someone by telling other people that you 
agree with them backup In): I didn't believe Simon's story until 
Janice backed him up. 
back up make a copy of information on your computer 
backup In): Make sure you back all your data up, just in case 
you get a virus. 
black out make a place dark by turning off all the lights, for 
example so that the enemy cannot see a place at night 
blackout In): The whole city was blacked out for nights on end 
during the war. 
black out suddenly become unconscious: He had blacked out as 
his car hit the tree. 
blend in if someone or something blends in, they are similar to 
the other people, objects, buildings, etc around them, and so 
they seem appropriate or you do not notice them: The building 
doesn't really blend in very well with the others around it. 
blurt out say something suddenly and without thinking about the 
effect it will have, usually because you are nervous or excited: 
She blurted out his name, then gasped as she realised what 
she'd done. 
board up cover a window or door with wooden boards: We 
boarded the house up because we knew a bad storm 
was coming. 
break down divide something such as a total amount into 
separate parts breakdown In): The amount doesn't seem quite 
so bad when you break it down into monthly payments. 
break up break something to make smaller pieces: Break that old 
wardrobe up; then I can put it on the fire. 
break up if a meeting or other event breaks up, or if you break it 
up, it ends and people leave: The meeting finally broke up 
after three hours. 
break up if two people break up, they end their relationship: When 
did Diana and James break up? 
brighten up if the weather brightens up, it becomes sunnier: It's 
brightening up, at last. 
brighten up start looking or feeling happier: Sarah brightened up 
considerably as she thought of Emily's words. 
brighten up start to have more colour or light, give something 
more colour or light: You could brighten up that skirt with a 
red blouse. 
bring about make something happen, especially to cause 
changes in a situation: It's not something we can bring 
about overnight. 
bring out make someone or something show a quality that they 
have: That dress really brings out the green in your eyes. 
bring out produce a new product and start to sell it: They've 
brought out a new 30 video camera. 
bring together create a situation in which people meet and do 
something together, especially when they would not usually do 
so: The attack on the city really brought people together. 
brush up (on) practise and improve your skills or knowledge of 
something: I took a class to brush up (on) my German before 
the trip. 
build up gradually develop: Many popular writers built up their 
reputations during the war. 
build up increase or make something increase: The food industry 
needs to build up consumer confidence again. 
build up make someone bigger, healthier and stronger, 
especially by making them eat more build-up In): You need lots 
of fresh fruit to help build you up. 
build up talk about someone or something in a very positive way 
so that people are impressed with them: They've built him up 
to be something that he isn't. 
bump into accidentally hit against something: It was dark and I 
bumped into the table. 
bump into meet someone unexpectedly: Guess who I bumped 
into in town? 
buy off give someone money so that they do not act against you: 
Efforts to buy her off have failed. 
buy out pay money to your business partner so that you can 
control all of a business you previously owned together buyout 
In): The other directors have offered to buy me out. 
buy up buy large amounts of something or all of it that is 
available: Developers have been buying up old theatres and 
converting them into cinemas. 
cancel out stop something from having any effect: These 
headphones cancel out any other noise so all you can hear is 
the music. 
carry over take something that you earn or are given in one year 
or period of time into the next one carry-over In): You are not 
allowed to carry over holiday entitlement from one year into 
the next. 
catch on become popular or fashionable: Sports drinks have 
caught on as consumers have become more health-conscious. 
catch on understand: He didn't catch on at first. 
centre around if something centres around someone or 
something, or you centre something around them, they are its 
main subject of attention or interest: The book centres around 
a woman who becomes an astronaut. 
chance upon find or see someone or something when you did 
not expect to: We chanced upon a charming little restaurant. 
change around move things so that they are in different places 
or positions: My friends had changed all the furniture in my 
room around as a joke. 
change into stop being in one state, condition or form and start 
being in another, or make something do this: The film was 
about a man who changes into a werewolf during the 
full moon. 
change into take off the clothes or a piece of clothing you are 
wearing and put on different ones: Let me just change into 
something a bit more comfortable. 
change out of take off the clothes or a piece of clothing you are 
wearing and put on different ones: Come inside and change 
out of those wet things. 
check out examine someone or something in order to be certain 
that everything is correct, true or satisfactory: I've been taking 
loads of photographs, just to check out the camera. 
check out if information checks out, you feel that it is true after 
examining it: Their story just didn't check out. 
245

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

Phrasal verbs database 
246 
clock up reach a particular number or amount: Dawson has 
clocked up 34 years as a police officer. 
close up lock the doors of a building or business: The newsagent 
was closing up for the evening. 
club together if people club together, each of them gives some 
money so all the money collected can be used to buy 
something: Let's all club together and get her a nice present. 
come across meet someone or find something by chance: / 
came across a reference to my grandfather in an old book. 
come (a)round (to) change your opinion or decision because 
someone has persuaded you to agree with them: / didn't 
agree at first but I've come la)round to the idea now. 
come between cause a disagreement or argument between 
people: / would never let anything come between us. 
come out be removed from something such as clothing or cloth 
by washing or rubbing: The stain finally came out, but I had to 
wash the T-shirt three times. 
come out be spoken, heard or understood in a particular way: 
That came out wrong. Let me rephrase it. 
come out become available to buy or see: The magazine comes 
out every Thursday. 
come out become easy to notice: These differences don't come 
out until you put the two groups in a room together. 
come out become known: He said it'll all come out in court. 
come out have a particular result or end in a particular way: 
Everything came out all right in the end. 
come out in become covered in spots because you are ill or your 
body reacts to a food or medicine: She can't eat shellfish 
without coming out in spots. 
come out with say something suddenly, usually something that 
surprises or shocks people: You never know what the children 
are going to come out with. 
come round become conscious again after being unconscious: I 
felt sick when I came round after the operation. 
come round change your opinion or decision because someone 
has persuaded you to agree with them: We were sure she'd 
come round in the end. 
come round go to a place where someone is, especially their 
house, in order to visit them: Why don't you come round 
after work7 
come round if a regular event comes round, it happens again: 
Jean's annual garden party must be coming round again soon. 
come up with think of something such as an idea or a plan: /s 
that the best you can come up with7 
cool down become cooler, or make something cooler: It's cooled 
down a lot in the last couple of days. 
cordon off stop people from entering an area by putting 
something such as a rope around it: Why have they cordoned 
off the city centre 7 
cotton on begin to realise or understand something: Suddenly I 
cottoned on. She'd been lying from the start. 
crack down (on) start dealing with someone or something much 
more strictly crackdown In): It's about time they cracked down 
on people who drop litter. 
crease up laugh a lot, or make someone laugh a lot: You really 
crease me up1 
creep up on move towards someone quietly and slowly, 
especially because you want to surprise them: / watched a cat 
as it crept up on a bird. 
crop up appear or happen suddenly or unexpectedly: Ben had to 
go back to work - something's cropped up there. 
crowd around move to a particular place at the same time as a 
lot of other people: Everyone crowded around the actor as he 
signed autographs. 
cut back (on) reduce the amount of something, especially money 
that you spend: I'm trying to cut back on groceries. 
cut out remove something from a larger piece by cutting: Cut out 
the material you need and make sure it's the right size. 
cut out stop eating something or doing something, especially 
because it is bad for your health: I'm going to have to cut 
coffee out because it gives me indigestion. 
die out become weaker or less common and then disappear 
completely: There used to be wolves here but they've 
died out. 
dig up dig holes in an area of land: Po/ice have dug the garden up 
looking for evidence. 
dig up find information by searching carefully: See what you can 
dig up on the Internet on Mr Anderson. 
dig up remove something from under the ground by digging: 
Archaeologists have dug up a bag of coins from Roman times. 
dive in start doing something in a very enthusiastic way: 
Sometimes you've just got to take a chance and dive in. 
do away with get rid of: Did you hear that they're going to do 
away with private universities altogether7 
do up fasten (an item of clothing): Do your coat up or you'll 
catch cold. 
do up repair, paint and improve an old building, car, boat, etc: We 
bought an old farmhouse in France, intending to do it up. 
drum up try to make people support you or buy something from 
you: Advertisements should help to drum up some business. 
dry up if something dries up or is dried up, all the water comes 
out of it: The river has completely dried up. 
dry up stop being available: I'm a TV repairman, but work seems 
to have dried up lately. 
dry up stop talking because you have forgotten what you were 
going to say: I hope I don't dry up in the middle of my speech. 
end up be in a particular place or state after doing something or 
because of doing it: Keep on doing that and you'll end up in 
serious trouble. 
face up to accept something and try to deal with it: He was the 
only one who faced up to the problem. 
fade away disappear slowly: To my amazement, the letters on 
the page slowly faded away. 
fall behind make less progress or be less successful than other 
people who are doing a similar job or activity: / was off school 
for two months with my illness and I fell behind the others. 
fall behind move more slowly than other people so that you are 
behind them: / got tired on the walk and gradually fell behind 
the rest. 
figure out be able to understand something or solve a problem or 
understand what someone is like and why they behave in the 
way they do: We had to figure out the connection between the 
two events. 
fix up clean, repair or decorate something: Why don't we try to fix 
up that old bike of yours7 
follow up check the health of someone who has received medical 
treatment in order to be certain that it was effective: The 
study followed up over 200 heart patients. 
follow up try to find out more about something or do something 
more to deal with it follow-up In): The police are now following 
up some new leads. 
get across make people understand something: We've got to get 
the message across more clearly. 
get (a)round if news gets (a)round, a lot of people hear it: The 
rumours got around town very quickly, didn't they7 
get down make someone feel sad or lose hope, start feeling sad 
or losing hope: Doing the same thing every day can get 
you down.

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

get in be elected for a political job: If I get in, there'll be a few 
changes around here. 
get into become involved in a bad situation: Craig started to get 
into crime while he was still at school. 
get into if a train, plane, etc gets into a place, it arrives there: 
What time do we get into Norwich7 
get into start enjoying something or become enthusiastic about it: 
It took me a while to get into this CD, but now I listen to it al/ 
the time. 
get off have a particular period of time as a holiday: Will you get 
Easter off7 
get off not be punished severely or at all for something you have 
been accused of in court: I can't believe he got off when there 
was so much evidence against him. 
get off send something, for example in the post: I'll get those 
invitations off tomorrow. 
get over find a way to solve or deal with a difficult problem: There 
are many hurdles still to get over before the new restaurant 
can open. 
get over start to feel happy or well again after something bad has 
happened to you, start to forget someone and feel happy 
again after a relationship has ended: It can take weeks to get 
over an illness like that. 
get through finish dealing with some work, a subject, etc: I've got 
a lot of work to get through. 
get through manage to deal with a difficult situation or stay alive 
until it is over: How we got through it I'll never know. 
get through use or finish something: We get through a litre of 
milk a day. 
get through (to) be connected to a place by telephone: I tried 
calling him but I couldn't get through for some reason. 
get through (to) make someone understand what you are trying 
to say: The teacher feels he is not getting through to some of 
the kids in his class. 
give in if you give in to something, you can no longer control the 
feeling of wanting it: I finally gave in and had a cream cake. 
give in stop competing or arguing and accept that you cannot 
win: In the end, I gave in and accepted that she was right. 
go astray become lost or go to the wrong place: We went astray 
but soon found our way again. 
go down (well/badly) (with sb) produce a particular reaction: 
The plan to put rents up has not gone down well with tenants. 
go in for choose something as a subject of study or as your 
career: I'm going to go in for dentistry. 
go in for enjoy a particular thing or activity: My dad doesn't really 
go in for parties. 
go off explode or be fired: A bomb has gone off in the shopping 
mall. 
go off if food or drink goes off, it is no longer fresh: Does this 
milk smell like it's gone off to you7 
go off leave a place, especially for a particular purpose: Pete's 
just gone off to get some chewing gum. 
go off stop liking someone or something: I've gone off peanuts, 
for some reason. 
go together if two or more things go together, they frequently 
exist together: Why do poverty and crime seem to go together 
so often? 
go together if two things go together, they seem good, natural 
or attractive in combination with each other: Do this skirt and 
this top go together 7 
grow on if something or someone grows on you, you start to like 
them more: / didn't like that painting at first, but it's growing 
on me. 
Phrasal verbs database 
hang out lean out of a window so that the top part of your body is 
outside: Don't hang out of the window or you'll fall! 
hang out spend time in a particular place or with particular 
people hang-out (n): We often just hang out at each 
other's houses. 
head off prevent someone from going somewhere by getting in 
front of them: One police officer chased the robber while the 
other went to head him off. 
head off prevent something from taking place: The UN has sent 
emergency aid into the area to head off a catastrophe. 
heat up make something hot; become hot: Heat up the baby's 
milk, would you? 
hit back criticise someone who has criticised you: The Minister 
hit back at his critics. 
hit back deliberately hurt someone who has hurt you: If someone 
hits you, think before you hit back next time. 
hit upon discover something by chance: She was scared he 
might hit upon the truth. 
hit upon suddenly have an idea: They hit upon the idea of 
celebrating the occasion with a concert. 
hold back stop someone or something from moving forwards: 
The police held back the crowd. 
keep up continue to do something: I don't think I can afford to 
keep up my piano lessons. 
keep up move at the same speed as someone or something: Dan 
walks so fast that it's not easy to keep up with him. 
key in put information into a computer or other electronic 
machine using keys or a keyboard: All you have to do is key 
your details in and the computer does the rest. 
kick off (with) begin (with): I'd like to kick off with a quick look at 
last month's sales figures. 
kill off destroy living things so that most or all of them are dead: 
The pollution killed off all the fish in the lake. 
knock off stop working: Do you want to knock off early tonighU 
knock/pull/tear down destroy a building or wall: I see they've 
finally knocked the old factory down. 
knuckle down start working hard, especially when you should 
have done this earlier: It's time for me to knuckle down and 
get this finished. 
lash out speak angrily to or against someone: They lashed out at 
the council's move to stop free parking. 
lash out try to hit or attack someone suddenly and violently: 
Occasionally the patients will lash out at the nurses. 
lay off end someone's employment, especially temporarily, 
because there is not enough work for them: They've had to 
cut back production and lay off workers. 
lay off stop doing or using something, especially for a short 
period of time: Lay off teasing your brother, Julie! 
laze around relax and enjoy yourself, doing no work: I'm just 
planning to laze around this weekend. 
let on talk about something that is intended to be a secret: He 
knows more than he lets on. 
lie ahead if something lies ahead, it is going to happen to you in 
the future: A bright future lies ahead of him. 
liven up give something a more interesting appearance, taste 
or other quality: You can liven up a plain shirt with a 
colourful scarf. 
liven up make something more interesting or exciting, or 
become more interesting or exciting: What we needed was 
some music to liven things up. 
lock up lock all the doors and windows of a building so that no 
one can get in: I must have forgotten to lock up when I left 
this morning. 
247

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

Phrasal verbs database 
248 
lock up put someone in a prison: They should lock him up for a 
very long time, if you ask me. 
make into change someone or something so that they become 
something else: It's as if my parents are trying to make me 
into the idea/ student, so I'm under a lot of pressure. 
make out see, hear or understand someone or something with 
difficulty: Can you make out a face here in the photograph7 
make out suggest, imply: It's not as simple as some people 
make out. 
make over change or improve the appearance of someone 
or something makeover (n): They made over three 
contestants on the show. When they'd finished, they looked 
completely different. 
make up work at different times from usual because you have not 
worked enough at the normal times: Sorry I'm late; I'll make 
up the time this evening. 
meet up come together with someone, either unexpectedly or as 
planned: Why don't we meet up when I'm in Berlin, since it's 
not far from you7 
mess about/around behave in a silly way: Mrs Evans asked the 
children to stop messing around. 
mess about/around spend time doing things in a relaxed way: 
There's nothing I like better than messing about in the garden. 
mess up be the cause of someone's physical, emotional or 
mental problems: Drugs really messed her up. 
mess up make a mistake or do something badly: She says she 
completely messed up the interview. 
mess up make something dirty or untidy: The wind had messed 
her hair up. 
mix up put things together without any order: If you put different 
co/as into different glasses and mixed them up, could you tell 
which was which7 
mix up think that one person or thing is another person or thing 
mix-up (n): I've only ever mixed the Hampson twins up once, 
but it was really embarrassing' 
mount up get much larger: The costs are beginning to mount up. 
move in (with) start living in a different house or flat (with): When 
he got divorced, John moved in with me. 
move on leave one place and travel to another: My job means 
that I tend to stay in one city for a year or two and then 
move on. 
move on stop discussing or doing something and begin 
discussing or doing something different: I think we should 
move on, or we'll never finish the meeting on time. 
move out permanently leave the house or flat where you live or 
the place where you have your business: / hear you've finally 
moved out of your parents' place. 
move over change your position in order to make space for 
someone or something: The woman moved over so that / 
could sit on the bench. 
mull over think carefully about something over a period of time: 
They'll need time to mull over the proposals. 
open up make it easier to travel or do business in a country: 
You'd be amazed at how much China has opened up since you 
were there. 
open up open a locked door, container or building: When we 
opened the box up, we found a puppy inside. 
open up talk more about your personal feelings and experiences: 
Henry doesn't find it easy to open up. 
opt out (of) decide not to take part in something or stop taking 
part in it: Quite a few of the students have opted out of the 
school trip. 
paper over hide a problem or disagreement rather than finding a 
satisfactory solution to it: Fundamental problems were 
papered over, not resolved. 
pass away/on die (used to avoid saying 'die' when you think this 
might upset someone): He passed away in his sleep at the 
age of 84. 
pass on give someone something, for example a message, that 
someone else has given you: When you've read this message, 
please pass it on. 
patch up become friends with someone again after a 
disagreement: The meeting was intended to patch up relations 
between the two sides. 
patch up give basic medical treatment to someone who is injured: 
The nurses managed to patch her up temporarily. 
patch up repair something, often quickly and not very well: The 
road needs resurfacing, not just patching up. 
pay back give someone the same amount of money that you 
borrowed from them: I'll be able to pay you back next week. 
pay out provide money from an amount invested over a period 
of time: WI/ be a few years before our investments start 
paying out. 
pay out spend or pay money, especially a lot of money: We've 
paid out thousands of pounds in health insurance over 
the years. 
phase out gradually stop using something: They're phasing out 
the old style driving licence. 
pick on keep treating someone badly or unfairly, especially by 
criticising them: Why don't you pick on someone your 
own size? 
pick up go and meet someone or something that you have 
arranged to take somewhere in a vehicle: I'll pick you up 
at twelve. 
pick up improve: They won't let him out of hospital until his health 
has picked up quite a lot. 
pick up learn a new skill or start a habit without intending to: / 
picked Chinese up when I was living there. 
piece together learn the truth about something by considering all 
the separate bits of information you have: Detectives are still 
piecing together the circumstances surrounding the incident. 
pile up if something piles up or someone piles it up, the amount 
of it increases a lot: The washing-up is beginning to pile up, so 
let's do it together. 
play up cause difficulties or pain for someone: The printer's 
playing up again. 
play up if children play up or play someone up, they behave badly: 
I'm exhausted! The children have been really playing up this 
afternoon. 
press ahead/on (with) continue doing something in a 
determined way, despite difficulties, opposition or 
interruptions: They pressed ahead regardless of objections. 
prop up help a government, system, organisation, etc continue to 
exist, especially by providing financial or military support: The 
US has been propping the government up in that country 
for years. 
prop up stop something from falling by putting something under it 
or against it: I had to use some books to prop my desk up. 
pull over stop by the side of the road in a car or other vehicle: 
Could you just pull over for a second7 
pull through manage to stay alive after you have been very 
ill or very badly injured: Don't worry, your dad's going to 
pull through. 
pull through succeed in a very difficult situation, or help someone 
do this: He said the support of his fans pulled him through. 
push around keep telling someone what to do in an unfair or 
unpleasant way: You really shouldn't let her push you around 
like that.

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

put across/over explain an idea, belief, etc in a way that is easy 
to understand: Television can be a useful way of putting 
across health messages. 
put down to if you put something down to a particular reason, 
you think it has happened for that reason: What do you put 
your success down to? 
put in fix something such as equipment in the place where it will 
be used and make it ready to use: We're having air 
conditioning put in tomorrow. 
put in make an official request, claim, offer, etc: Don't forget to 
sign the form when you put in your application. 
put in spend a particular amount of time doing something, or 
make a particular amount of effort in order to do something 
input (n): Bob's put in a lot of hard work on this project. 
put together choose people or things to form a team or group: 
I'm putting together an expedition to the Andes. 
put together make something by joining all its parts: How long 
did it take you to put that jigsaw together7 
put together produce or organise something using many different 
things: / really enjoyed putting the exhibition together. 
put up build something such as a wall, fence or house: Dad's 
putting a fence up around the garden. 
put up let someone stay in your house: Yes, I can put you up for a 
few days. 
puzzle out solve a confusing or complicated problem by thinking 
carefully about it: She seemed to be trying to puzzle out who 
the caller might be. 
read up ( on/about) get information on a particular subject by 
reading a lot about it: I need to read up on my British history. 
run down if an organisation or area is run down, its size, 
importance and activity is reduced run-down (adj): They've 
been running the factory down for the last five years. 
scrape through succeed in doing something, but not in a very 
impressive way: He just managed to scrape through the 
entrance exam. 
seek out find someone or something by looking for them in a 
determined way: The dogs are trained to seek out drugs. 
set down state officially how somethine should be done: These 
conditions were set down by the United Nations. 
set down write something on a piece of paper so that it will not 
be forgotten and can be looked at later: She set all these 
events down in her diary. 
set out start doing or working on something in order to achieve 
an aim outset (n): Did you set out to become a millionaire? 
set up build a structure or put it in a particular place: let's set the 
tent up over there. 
set up make a piece of equipment ready for use: How do you set 
the pieces up at the start of a game of chess? 
shout down make it difficult to hear what someone says by 
shouting while they are speaking: The Minister was shouted 
down as he tried to justify the government's decision. 
shrivel up become smaller and thinner than usual and not look 
fresh and healthy: The leaves had shrivelled up in the 
summer heat. 
shrivel up become weaker or smaller in amount: Funding for the 
project eventually shrivelled up. 
single out choose one person from a group for special attention: 
The actor thanked everyone who had helped him and singled 
out his manager for special thanks. 
size up think carefully and form an opinion about a person or a 
situation: He sized up the situation and then decided what 
to do. 
slip away leave secretly: After an hour at the party, I managed to 
slip away without anyone noticing. 
Phrasal verbs database 
slip up make a careless mistake slip-up /nJ: We can't afford to slip 
up this time. 
smarten up if you smarten up or smarten yourself up, you make 
yourself look tidy and clean: I'm going to smarten myself up a 
bit before the meeting. 
smarten up improve the appearance of something, for example 
by cleaning or painting it: This room needs smartening up. 
snow under if you are snowed under, you have too much of sth to 
deal with: I'm snowed under with work at the moment. 
sound out try to find out someone's opinions, ideas, feelings, 
etc by talking to them: The council decided to sound out 
local opinion. 
speak out state your opinion firmly and publicly about something, 
especially in order to protest against or defend something: He 
had always spoken out in favour of women's rights. 
spread out if people in a group spread out, they move away from 
one another so that they cover a large area: We've got more 
chance of finding him if we spread out. 
spring up appear or be produced suddenly and quickly: A lot of 
cafes have sprung up around here lately. 
stand out be easy to see or notice because of being different: His 
turquoise tie stood out against his black suit. 
stand out be much more impressive or important than others 
outstanding (adj): Germany stands out as the leader in 
environmental reporting. 
stand up to not allow yourself to be treated badly, especially by 
someone in authority: Why don't you stand up to your boss a 
bit more? 
step aside leave a job so that sb else can take over: The 
chairman stepped aside to allow a younger person to 
take over. 
step aside move so that sb can pass you: We stepped aside to 
/et someone in a wheelchair through. 
stop off visit somewhere before continuing to another place: We 
can stop off at the bakery on the way to school. 
store up do something that will cause problems in the future: If 
you ignore it, you're just storing up problems for the future. 
store up keep a lot of something so that you can use it later: 
Squirrels store up nuts for the winter. 
summon up manage to produce a quality or a reaction that helps 
you deal with a difficult situation: He couldn't summon up the 
strength to carry on fighting. 
switch on/off start/stop a machine/light/etc working: It's boiling 
in here - switch the air conditioning on. 
swot up (on) study something very hard, especially for an 
examination: I've got to swot up the French Revolution for 
tomorrow's test. 
take after look or behave like an older relative: Doesn't she take 
after her mother? 
take apart separate an object into pieces: / took my computer 
apart completely, but / still didn't find the problem. 
take away remove one number or quantity from another number 
or quantity: If you take three away from five, you're left 
with two. 
take down separate a large structure into pieces: After the play, 
we had to take down all the scenery. 
take down write down information or a statement: The police 
took down my details. 
take in accept something as real or true: He still hasn't really 
taken in his father's death. 
take in include something: The tour takes in some incredible 
scenery. 
take in trick someone into believing something that is not true: 
Don't be taken in by their promises. 
249

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====

Phrasal verbs database 
250 
take in understand and remember something that you hear or 
read: I'm not sure how much of his explanation she took in. 
take off become successful or popular very fast take-off (n): The 
new design took off immediately. 
take off have a particular amount of time away from work: Can I 
take next Friday off? 
take on accept some work or responsibility: I can't take on any 
more work at the moment. 
take on start to employ someone: We're not taking on any new 
staff at the moment. 
take out take someone to a place like a cinema or a restaurant 
and usually pay for them: On my birthday, I took everyone 
out bowling. 
take over begin to do something that someone else was doing: 
When Ivy got tired, I took over the driving. 
take over take control of something: Whenever we start 
organising something, you always want to take over. 
take to begin to like someone or something: I didn't take to living 
here straight away. 
take to start doing something as a habit: I've taken to getting up 
much earlier. 
talk down to talk to someone as if you think they are not as 
clever or important as you are: I hate the way Belinda talks 
down to people. 
talk over discuss a problem or a plan: I know you're still angry; 
let's talk it over tonight. 
talk round discuss something in a general way and without 
dealing with the most important issues: We're just talking 
round the problem at the moment; let's try to come up with 
some concrete solutions. 
talk round succeed in persuading someone to agree to 
something: I'm sure I can talk her round. 
test out try using something such as a machine or product to find 
out whether it works correctly or is satisfactory: I'm taking my 
new model aeroplane to the park to test it out. 
think over consider a problem or decision carefully: Let's think 
over his proposal before we see him again. 
think through consider the facts about something in an organised 
and thorough way: Have you had time to think things through? 
think up invent or imagine something, especially an excuse: She'd 
have to think up a good reason for being late. 
throw out force someone to leave a place or group: Charlie was 
thrown out of the Scouts. 
throw out get rid of something that you no longer want, for 
example by putting it in a dustbin: Are you throwing these 
things out? 
throw out if someone in authority throws out a plan, proposal, 
etc they refuse to accept it: The Minister threw out 
the proposed changes. 
throw up cause something such as dust or water to rise into the 
air: As the helicopter landed, it threw up a lot of dust. 
throw up produce something new or unexpected: The new rules 
have thrown up a few problems. 
tide over help someone to get to the end of a difficult period of 
time, especially by giving them money until they can get some 
more: Could you lend me £50 to tide me over until pay day? 
tip up (of an object) have one end move upwards, especially 
because something heavy has been put at the other end: The 
bench began to tip up when I sat on it. 
tip up turn a container upside down so that the things inside it 
come out: I tipped the box up and emptied everything onto 
the table. 
touch up make a surface look better with small improvements: 
Touch up the paintwork before you try and sell the house. 
turn into change or develop into something different: The sofa 
turns into a bed, so you can stay with us, if you like. 
turn into make someone or something change or develop into 
something different: Stop trying to tum me into someone 
I'm not! 
use up use all of a supply of something: Did you use the butter up 
when you were making cakes? 
walk out leave a meeting, performance, etc before the end, 
usually because you are angry or bored: I walked out halfway 
through the film. 
walk out suddenly leave a relationship, your family, your job, etc: 
You can't just walk out like this! 
ward off do something to prevent someone or something from 
harming you: Sheila carried a knife to ward off attacks. 
warm up prepare for a sport or activity by doing gentle exercises 
or practising just before it starts warm-up (n): It's very 
important to warm up before you exercise. 
waste away gradually become thinner and weaker over a period 
of time, usually because of an illness: He hadn't eaten properly 
for weeks and was starting to waste away. 
water down add water to a drink or liquid in order to make it less 
strong, dilute: If it's too strong, water it down. 
water down make something such as a statement or newspaper 
article less offensive, powerful or detailed: The editor watered 
my article down. 
wear down make someone gradually lose their energy or 
confidence: This constant criticism at work is really wearing 
me down. 
wear down make something gradually disappear or become 
thinner by using or rubbing it: These shoes are uncomfortable 
because the heel has worn down. 
wear out use something a lot so that it no longer works, or can 
no longer be used: On my walking holiday, I wore out three 
pairs of boots. 
weigh down cause problems for someone or something or make 
someone worried: The entire industry has been weighed down 
by economic uncertainty. 
weigh down make someone heavy and unable to move easily: 
The waiters were weighed down by huge trays of food. 
while away spend time in a relaxed way when you have nothing 
else to do: We whiled away the Saturday afternoon sitting by 
the lake. 
wind down end or finish something gradually: The party started to 
wind down around two am. 
wind down gradually reduce work before stopping completely: 
The factory will wind down production before closing 
next year. 
wind down relax after a period of excitement or worry: It's hard to 
wind down after doing such a stressful job all day. 
write off damage a vehicle so badly that it is not worth repairing: 
My uncle wrote his car off in an accident last weekend. 
write off decide that someone or something will not succeed and 
stop giving them your attention and energy write-off (n): He felt 
hopeless; his teachers had written him off.
