              3 Grammar
U N IT



                             II Past time


      Past simple
      Single completed actions                 Sony and Philips invented the CD in the early 1 980s.
      Repeated or habitual actions in the past We moved house a lot when I was a kid.
      General truths about the past            Early clocks were usually very unreliable.
      Permanent situations and states          Did the ancient Egyptians have more advanced technology than other civilisations?
      in the past
      The main events in a story               Frank turned on the TV and sat on the sofa.
      The present (in conditional sentences)   If we didn't have computers, what would the world be like?
      (see Unit 1 1 for more information)
      The present (after wish, it's time,      I'd rather Michael didn't waste so much time playing video games.
      would rather, etc)
      (see Unit 1 3 for more information)


      Emphatic past simple
      To emphasise contrast in the past            Perhaps our grandparents didn't have e-mail, but they did have the telephone and
                                                   telegrams.
      To emphasise strong feeling in the past      / did enjoy our visit to the Science Museum last summer.



      Past simple vs present perfect simple
      •   In general, the past simple is used to refer to periods of time or moments which are finished. The present perfect is used to
          refer to periods of time which continue up to the present.
          ✓ The nineteenth century saw many technological advances, such as the camera and the electric light bulb.
          ✓ There have been many technological advances in recent years, the most important being the spread of the Internet.
      •   The past simple is used to refer to events at a specific time in the past. The present perfect is used when the specific time
          something happened isn't important or relevant, or when the present result of a past event is important.
          ✓ I sent my first e-mail six months ago.
          ✓ Have you ever sent an e-mail before?



      Past continuous
      Actions in progress at a particular           Were you chatting to Matt online at midnight last night?
      moment in the past
      Actions in progress around a particular       At the turn of the twentieth century, many discoveries were being made
      moment in the past                            in physics and other sciences.
      Temporary situations and series of            At the time, I was working for a large software company in California.
      actions in the past
      Changing and developing situations            I was getting frustrated with my internet provider so I decided to change.
      in the past
      Annoying or amusing past habits               When she was young, Tina was always taking things apart to see how they worked.
      (usually with a/ways)
      Background information in a story             It was raining outside and people were making their way home after work.
      Actions in progress over a period of time     Were you writing e-mails all yesterday morning?
      Two actions in progress at the same time      While I was playing a computer game, my brother was doing his homework.
      The present and the future (in conditional    Would you be happier if you were studying computer science?
      sentences)
      (see Unit 1 1 for more information)
      The present and the future (after wish,       I wish we were going to the computer fair next weekend.
      it's time, would rather, etc)
      (see Unit 1 3 for more information)


 22

                                                                                                                        Past time   Unit 3



Past continuous vs past simple
• We often use the past continuous to describe background events in progress and the past simple for the main events.
  ✓ We were talking about MP3s when Andrea mentioned her new music website.
• We normally use the past simple to describe regular or repeated actions in the past, not the past continuous.
  ✓ When I was a child, I visited my grandmother every week.


Past continuous vs present perfect continuous
   In general, the past continuous is used to refer to actions in progress during periods of time or at moments which are
   finished. The present perfect continuous is used to refer to actions in progress during periods of time which continue up to
   the present.
   ✓ We were working on my computer for four hours yesterday.
   ✓ We have been working on my computer for four hours so far.


Past perfect simple
Situations and states before the past       Had you had your computer long before it broke dowh?
Completed actions before a moment           When talking films appeared, the cinema had already become a popular form
in the past                                 of entertainment.
                                               When Dimitra called, I had managed to fix her computer.
A series of actions continuing up to a         By the time of his death, Thomas Edison had invented a number of things that
moment in the past                             changed everyday life.
Completed actions where the important I beat Jason at International Captain because I'd played it a lot with my brother.
thin12: is the result at a moment in the n;ist

Past perfect continuous
Actions and situations continuing up to a   She'd been writing computer games for over ten years before she finally had
moment in the past (or just before a        a hit.
moment in the past)



Past habits, particularly for the           The ancient Greeks would rely on the power of slaves, rather than machines.
distant ast


      • Would can also be used with a continuous infinitive when we are referring to a habit involving actions in progress.
        ✓ Whenever I went to James's house, he would usually be playing on his computer.
      • Would is not usually used to refer to past states.




Past habits and states, particularly for    It used to seem strange to be able to communicate over long distances.
the distant past

      • Remember that used to is not the same as be used to. Be used to refers to a situation that is now familiar or
        no longer strange.
        ✓ At first, people found it strange sending messages by mobile, but now everyone's used to it.
      • We use get used to to refer to the process of becoming familiar with a situation.
        ✓ It's surprising how quickly people in the nineteeth century got used to travelling by train.




                                                                                                                                    23

